Summarize the answer length of the voice bot to the 50 words max. Do not repeat long product names multiple times and instead use words such as "this fund", etc. 
when talking about a fund that already was mentioned earlier. If a person asks you about some numbers or statistics, make initial phrase to be like "let me take a look"
or "let me look it up for you". Do not repeat Goldman Sachs Growth Strategy Portfolio multiple times. After the first time, refer to this fund as "this fund", when mentioning
in the conversation. 

Start the conversation with a small talk asking about how you are doing.

Before you invest, you may want to review the Goldman Sachs Growth Strategy Portfolio (the “Fund”) Prospectus, which contains more information
about the Fund and its risks. You can find the Fund’s Prospectus, reports to shareholders and other information about the Fund online at
www.gsamfunds.com/mutualfunds. You can also get this information at no cost by calling 800-621-2550 or by sending an e-mail request to
gs-funds-document-requests@gs.com. The Fund’s Prospectus and Statement of Additional Information (“SAI”), both dated April 29, 2024, are
incorporated by reference into this Summary Prospectus.
INVESTMENT OBJECTIVE
The Goldman Sachs Growth Strategy Portfolio (the Fund) seeks long-term capital appreciation and, secondarily, current income.
FEES AND EXPENSES OF THE FUND
This table describes the fees and expenses that you may pay if you buy, hold and sell shares of the Fund. You may pay other fees, such as brokerage
commissions and other fees to financial intermediaries, which are not reflected in the table and Example below. You may qualify for sales
charge discounts on purchases of Class A Shares if you invest at least $50,000 in Goldman Sachs Funds. More information about these and other
discounts is available from your financial professional and in “Shareholder Guide—Common Questions Applicable to the Purchase of Class A
Shares” beginning on page 71 and in Appendix C—Additional Information About Sales Charge Variations, Waivers and Discounts beginning on page
129 of the Prospectus and “Other Information Regarding Maximum Sales Charge, Purchases, Redemptions, Exchanges and Dividends” beginning on
page B-175 of the Fund’s Statement of Additional Information (“SAI”).

EXPENSE EXAMPLE
This Example is intended to help you compare the cost of investing in
the Fund with the cost of investing in other mutual funds.
The Example assumes that you invest $10,000 in Class A, Class C,
Institutional, Service, Investor, Class R and/or Class R6 Shares of the
Fund for the time periods indicated and then redeem all of your Class A,
Class C, Institutional, Service, Investor, Class R and/or Class R6 Shares
at the end of those periods. The Example also assumes that your
investment has a 5% return each year and that the Fund’s operating
expenses remain the same (except that the Example incorporates any
applicable fee waiver and/or expense limitation arrangements for only
the first year). Although your actual costs may be higher or lower, based
on these assumptions your costs would be:
1 Year 3 Years 5 Years 10 Years
Class A Shares $643 $849 $1,073 $1,714
Class C Shares $274 $549 $949 $2,069
Institutional Shares $61 $203 $357 $806
Service Shares $112 $360 $628 $1,393
Investor Shares $73 $238 $417 $938
Class R Shares $123 $395 $687 $1,518
Class R6 Shares $60 $200 $352 $794
Class C Shares –
Assuming no
redemption $174 $549 $949 $2,069
PORTFOLIO TURNOVER
The Fund does not pay transaction costs when it buys and sells shares of
underlying mutual funds. However, the Fund and each Underlying Fund
pays transaction costs when it buys and sells other securities or
instruments (i.e., “turns over” its portfolio). A high rate of portfolio
turnover may result in increased transaction costs, including brokerage
commissions, which must be borne by the Underlying Fund and its
shareholders, including the Fund, and is also likely to result in higher
short-term capital gains for taxable shareholders. These costs are not
reflected in the annual fund operating expenses or in the expense
example above, but are reflected in the Fund’s performance. The Fund’s
portfolio turnover rate for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2023 was
67% of the average value of its portfolio.
PRINCIPAL STRATEGY
The Fund seeks to achieve its investment objective by investing in a
combination of underlying funds that currently exist or that may become
available for investment in the future for which Goldman Sachs Asset
Management, L.P. (“GSAM” or the “Investment Adviser”) or an
affiliate now or in the future acts as investment adviser or principal
underwriter without considering or canvassing the universe of
unaffiliated funds available, and may also invest in unaffiliated
exchange-traded funds (“ETFs”) (collectively, the “Underlying Funds”).
Some of the Underlying Funds invest primarily in fixed income or
money market instruments (the “Underlying Fixed Income Funds”),
some of the Underlying Funds invest primarily in equity securities (the
“Underlying Equity Funds”), and other Underlying Funds invest
dynamically across equity, fixed income, commodity and other markets
through a managed-volatility or trend-following approach (the
“Underlying Dynamic Funds”).
Under normal conditions, the Fund seeks to achieve its investment
objective by investing approximately 75% (which allocation could be
increased by 25% or decreased by 30%) of its assets in Underlying
Equity Funds, approximately 15% (which allocation could be increased
by 5% or decreased by 15%) of its assets in the Underlying Dynamic
Funds, and approximately 10% (which allocation could be increased by
30% or decreased by 10%) of its assets in the Underlying Fixed Income
Funds. The allocation will be measured at the time of rebalance.
Generally, the Investment Adviser rebalances the Fund approximately
monthly, but the Fund can be rebalanced more or less frequently at the
discretion of the Investment Adviser based on the market environment
and its macro views. Unless otherwise stated herein, the Fund’s
investment in any of the Underlying Funds may exceed 25% of its
assets. The Investment Adviser expects that the Fund will invest a
relatively significant percentage of its equity allocation in a
combination of the Goldman Sachs Large Cap Growth Insights Fund,
Goldman Sachs Large Cap Value Insights Fund, Small Cap Equity
Insights Fund, Goldman Sachs Emerging Markets Equity Insights,
Goldman Sachs Global Real Estate Securities, Goldman Sachs Global
Infrastructure, Goldman Sachs International Small Cap Insights and
Goldman Sachs International Equity Insights Funds, Goldman Sachs
Energy Infrastructure Fund, Goldman Sachs MarketBeta® U.S. Equity
ETF, Goldman Sachs ActiveBeta® U.S. Large Cap Equity ETF,
Goldman Sachs MarketBeta® International Equity ETF, Goldman Sachs
ActiveBeta® International Equity ETF, Goldman Sachs MarketBeta®
Emerging Markets Equity ETF, and Goldman Sachs ActiveBeta®
Emerging Markets Equity ETF; a relatively significant percentage of its
fixed income allocation in a combination of the Goldman Sachs High
Yield Floating Rate, Goldman Sachs Emerging Markets Debt, Goldman
Sachs Access Investment Grade Corporate Bond ETF, Goldman Sachs
High Yield and Goldman Sachs Financial Square Government Funds;
and a relatively significant percentage of its dynamic allocation in the
Goldman Sachs Managed Futures Strategy Fund.
The Fund may also use derivatives (including (i) futures contracts,
including futures based on equity or fixed income indices, and interest
rate futures; (ii) options, including long and short positions in call
options and put options on indices, individual securities or currencies
and options on futures contracts; and (iii) currency forwards, and
non-deliverable forwards) to gain exposure to securities in which the
Underlying Funds invest. The Fund may use derivatives for both
hedging and non-hedging purposes.
The Fund’s blended benchmark is the Growth Strategy Composite
Index, as discussed further under “Performance.”
THE PARTICULAR UNDERLYING FUNDS IN WHICH THE FUND
MAY INVEST, THE EQUITY/FIXED INCOME TARGETS AND
RANGES AND INVESTMENTS IN EACH UNDERLYING FUND
MAY BE CHANGED FROM TIME TO TIME WITHOUT
SHAREHOLDER APPROVAL OR NOTICE.
PRINCIPAL RISKS OF THE FUND
Loss of money is a risk of investing in the Fund. An investment in
the Fund is not a bank deposit and is not insured or guaranteed by
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”) or any
government agency. The Fund should not be relied upon as a
complete investment program. Stated allocations may be subject to
change. There can be no assurance that the Fund will achieve its
investment objective. Investments in the Fund involve substantial
risks which prospective investors should consider carefully before
investing. The Fund’s principal risks are presented below in
alphabetical order, and not in the order of importance or
potential exposure.

Asset Allocation Risk. The Fund’s allocations to the various underlying
asset classes may cause the Fund to underperform other funds with a
similar investment objective.
Derivatives Risk. The Fund’s use of futures, swaps, options, forward
contracts and other derivative instruments may result in losses. These
instruments, which may pose risks in addition to and greater than those
associated with investing directly in securities, currencies or other
instruments, may be illiquid or less liquid, volatile, difficult to price and
leveraged so that small changes in the value of the underlying
instruments may produce disproportionate losses to the Fund. Certain
derivatives are also subject to counterparty risk, which is the risk that
the other party in the transaction will not fulfill its contractual
obligations. The use of derivatives is a highly specialized activity that
involves investment techniques and risks different from those associated
with investments in more traditional securities and instruments.
Expenses Risk. By investing in the Underlying Funds indirectly through
the Fund, the investor will incur not only a proportionate share of the
expenses of the Underlying Funds held by the Fund (including operating
costs and investment management fees), but also the expenses of
the Fund.
Investing in the Underlying Funds. The investments of the Fund may
be concentrated in one or more Underlying Funds (including ETFs and
other registered investment companies) subject to limitations and/or
conditions prescribed by the Investment Company Act of 1940, as
amended (the “Investment Company Act”), or rules, regulations or
exemptive relief thereunder. The Fund’s investment performance is
directly related to the investment performance of the Underlying Funds
it holds. The Fund is subject to the risk factors associated with the
investments of the Underlying Funds in direct proportion to the amount
of assets allocated to each. If the Fund has a relative concentration of its
portfolio in a single Underlying Fund, it may be more susceptible to
adverse developments affecting that Underlying Fund and may be more
susceptible to losses because of these developments.
Investments in Affiliated Underlying Funds. The Investment Adviser
will have the authority to select and substitute Underlying Funds. The
Investment Adviser and/or its affiliates are compensated by the Fund
and by certain Underlying Funds for advisory and/or principal
underwriting services provided. The Investment Adviser is subject to
conflicts of interest in allocating Fund assets among certain Underlying
Funds both because the fees payable to it and/or its affiliates by the
Underlying Funds differ and because the Investment Adviser and its
affiliates are also responsible for managing the Underlying Funds. The
portfolio managers may also be subject to conflicts of interest in
allocating Fund assets among the various Underlying Funds because the
Fund’s portfolio management team may also manage some of the
Underlying Funds. The Trustees and officers of the Goldman Sachs
Trust may also have conflicting interests in fulfilling their fiduciary
duties to both the Fund and the Underlying Funds for which GSAM or
its affiliates now or in the future serve as investment adviser or principal
underwriter. In addition, the Investment Adviser’s authority to allocate
investments among affiliated and unaffiliated investment companies
creates conflicts of interest. For example, investing in affiliated
investment companies could cause the Fund to incur higher fees and
may cause the Investment Adviser and/or its affiliates to receive greater
compensation, increase assets under management or support particular
investment strategies or affiliated investment companies. In selecting
Underlying Funds, the Investment Adviser generally expects to select
affiliated investment companies without considering or canvassing the
universe of unaffiliated investment companies available even though
there may (or may not) be one or more unaffiliated investment
companies that may be a more appropriate addition to the Fund, that
investors may regard as a more attractive investment for the Fund, or
that may have higher returns. To the extent that an investment in an
affiliated investment company is not available, including as the result of
capacity constraints, only then will the Investment Adviser consider
unaffiliated investment companies.
Large Shareholder Transactions Risk. The Fund may experience
adverse effects when certain large shareholders purchase or redeem
large amounts of shares of the Fund. Such large shareholder
redemptions, which may occur rapidly or unexpectedly, may cause the
Fund to sell Fund securities at times when it would not otherwise do so,
which may negatively impact the Fund’s net asset value (“NAV”) and
liquidity. Similarly, large purchases of Fund shares may adversely affect
the Fund’s performance to the extent that the Fund is delayed in
investing new cash or otherwise maintains a larger cash position than it
ordinarily would. These transactions may also accelerate the realization
of taxable income to shareholders if such sales of investments resulted
in gains, and may also increase transaction costs. In addition, a large
redemption could result in the Fund’s current expenses being allocated
over a smaller asset base, leading to an increase in the Fund’s
expense ratio.
Temporary Investments. Although the Fund normally seeks to remain
substantially invested in the Underlying Funds, the Fund may invest a
portion of its assets in high-quality, short-term debt obligations to
maintain liquidity, to meet shareholder redemptions and for other
short-term cash needs. For temporary defensive purposes during
abnormal market or economic conditions, the Fund may invest without
limitation in short-term obligations. When the Fund’s assets are invested
in such investments, the Fund may not be achieving its
investment objective.
PRINCIPAL RISKS OF THE UNDERLYING FUNDS
The target and actual asset allocation percentages, the selection of
Underlying Funds and the investments in the Underlying Funds are
subject to change. Such changes may cause the Fund to be subject to
additional or different risks than the risks listed below.
The investment programs of some of the Underlying Funds are
speculative, entail substantial risks and include alternative
investment techniques not employed by traditional mutual funds.
The investment techniques of some of the Underlying Funds (if they
do not perform as designed) may increase the volatility of
performance and the risk of investment loss, including the loss of
the entire amount that is invested, and there can be no assurance
that the investment objectives of those Underlying Funds will be
achieved. Moreover, certain investment techniques which certain
Underlying Funds may employ in their investment programs can
substantially increase the adverse impact to which those Underlying
Funds’ investments may be subject. There is no assurance that the
investment processes of those Underlying Funds will be successful,
that the techniques utilized therein will be implemented successfully
or that they are adequate for their intended uses, or that the
discretionary element of the investment processes of those
Underlying Funds will be exercised in a manner that is successful or
that is not adverse to the Fund.
Absence of Regulation Risk. Certain of the Underlying Funds engage
in over-the-counter (“OTC”) transactions, which trade in a dealer
network, rather than on an exchange. In general, there is less
governmental regulation and supervision of transactions in the OTC
markets than of transactions entered into on organized exchanges.
Call/Prepayment Risk. An issuer could exercise its right to pay
principal on an obligation held by an Underlying Fund (such as a
mortgage-backed security) earlier than expected. This may happen when
there is a decline in interest rates, when credit spreads change, or when
an issuer’s credit quality improves. Under these circumstances, the
Underlying Fund may be unable to recoup all of its initial investment
and will also suffer from having to reinvest in lower-yielding securities.
Cash Transactions Risk. Unlike some ETFs, certain exchange-traded
Underlying Funds (“Underlying ETFs”) expect to effect their creations
and redemptions partially for cash, rather than primarily for in-kind
securities. As such, investments in Underlying ETF Shares (“ETF
Shares”) may be less tax-efficient than an investment in a conventional
ETF which generally are able to make in-kind redemptions and avoid
realizing gains in connection with transactions designed to raise cash to
meet redemption requests.
Commodity Sector Risk. Exposure to the commodities markets may
subject certain of the Underlying Funds to greater volatility than
investments in more traditional securities. The value of
commodity-linked investments may be affected by changes in overall
market movements, commodity index volatility, changes in interest
rates, or factors affecting a particular industry or commodity, such as
drought, floods, weather, livestock disease, embargoes, tariffs and
international economic, political and regulatory developments. The
prices of energy, industrial metals, precious metals, agriculture and
livestock sector commodities may fluctuate widely due to factors such
as changes in value, supply and demand and governmental regulatory
policies. The commodity-linked investments in which certain of the
Underlying Funds may enter into may involve companies in the
financial services sector, and events affecting the financial services
sector may cause the commodity’s, and therefore the Underlying Fund’s,
share value to fluctuate.
Counterparty Risk. Many of the protections afforded to cleared
transactions, such as the security afforded by transacting through a
clearing house, might not be available in connection with OTC
transactions. Therefore, in those instances in which an Underlying Fund
enters into uncleared OTC transactions, the Underlying Fund will be
subject to the risk that its direct counterparty will not perform its
obligations under the transactions and that the Underlying Fund will
sustain losses.
Credit/Default Risk. An issuer or guarantor of fixed income securities
or instruments held by an Underlying Fund (which may have low credit
ratings) may default on its obligation to pay interest and repay principal
or default on any other obligation. Additionally, the credit quality of
securities may deteriorate rapidly, which may impair an Underlying
Fund’s liquidity and cause significant deterioration in NAV. These risks
are heightened in market environments where interest rates are rising as
well as in connection with the Underlying Fund’s investments in
non-investment grade fixed income securities.
Depositary Receipts Risk. Foreign securities may trade in the form of
depositary receipts, which include American Depositary Receipts
(“ADRs”) and Global Depositary Receipts (“GDRs”) (collectively
“Depositary Receipts”). To the extent the Underlying Funds acquire
Depositary Receipts through banks which do not have a contractual
relationship with the foreign issuer of the security underlying the
Depositary Receipts to issue and service such unsponsored Depositary
Receipts, there may be an increased possibility that the Underlying
Funds would not become aware of and be able to respond to corporate
actions such as stock splits or rights offerings involving the foreign
issuer in a timely manner. In addition, the lack of information may
result in inefficiencies in the valuation of such instruments. Investment
in Depositary Receipts does not eliminate all the risks inherent in
investing in securities of non-U.S. issuers. The market value of
Depositary Receipts is dependent upon the market value of the
underlying securities and fluctuations in the relative value of the
currencies in which the Depositary Receipts and the underlying
securities are quoted. The issuers of Depositary Receipts may
discontinue issuing new Depositary Receipts and withdraw existing
Depositary Receipts at any time, which may result in costs and delays in
the distribution of the underlying assets to the Fund and may negatively
impact the Fund’s performance.
Derivatives Risk. An Underlying Fund’s use of forwards, options,
futures, swaps, options on swaps, structured securities and other
derivative instruments may result in losses. These instruments, which
may pose risks in addition to and greater than those associated with
investing directly in securities, currencies or other instruments, may be
illiquid or less liquid, volatile, difficult to price and leveraged so that
small changes in the value of the underlying instruments may produce
disproportionate losses to an Underlying Fund. Certain derivatives are
also subject to counterparty risk, which is the risk that the other party in
the transaction will not fulfill its contractual obligations. The use of
derivatives is a highly specialized activity that involves investment
techniques and risks different from those associated with investments in
more traditional securities and instruments.
Dividend-Paying Investments Risk. An Underlying Fund’s investments
in dividend-paying securities could cause the Underlying Fund to
underperform other funds. Securities that pay dividends, as a group, can
fall out of favor with the market, causing such securities to
underperform securities that do not pay dividends. Depending upon
market conditions and political and legislative responses to such
conditions, dividend-paying securities that meet an Underlying Fund’s
investment criteria may not be widely available and/or may be highly
concentrated in only a few market sectors. In addition, issuers that have
paid regular dividends or distributions to shareholders may not continue
to do so at the same level or at all in the future. This may limit the
ability of an Underlying Fund to produce current income.
Expenses Risk. Because the Underlying Funds may invest in pooled
investment vehicles (including investment companies and ETFs,
partnerships and real estate investment trusts (REITs)), the investor
will incur indirectly through the Fund a proportionate share of the
expenses of the other pooled investment vehicles, partnerships and
REITs held by the Underlying Fund (including operating costs and
investment management fees), in addition to the expenses of the
Underlying Fund.
Foreign and Emerging Countries Risk. Foreign securities may be
subject to risk of loss because of more or less foreign government
regulation; less public information; less stringent investor protections;
less stringent accounting, corporate governance, financial reporting and
disclosure standards; and less economic, political and social stability in
the countries in which the Underlying Fund invests. The imposition of
sanctions, exchange controls, confiscations, trade restrictions (including
tariffs) and other government restrictions by the United States and other
governments, or from problems in share registration, settlement or
custody, may also result in losses. The type and severity of sanctions
and other similar measures, including counter sanctions and other
retaliatory actions, that may be imposed could vary broadly in scope,
and their impact is impossible to predict. For example, the imposition of
sanctions and other similar measures could, among other things, cause a
decline in the value and/or liquidity of securities issued by the
sanctioned country or companies located in or economically tied to the
sanctioned country and increase market volatility and disruption in the
sanctioned country and throughout the world. Sanctions and other
similar measures could limit or prevent the Fund from buying and
selling securities (in the sanctioned country and other markets),
significantly delay or prevent the settlement of securities transactions,
and significantly impact the Fund’s liquidity and performance. Foreign
risk also involves the risk of negative foreign currency rate fluctuations,

which may cause the value of securities denominated in such foreign
currency (or other instruments through which the Underlying Fund has
exposure to foreign currencies) to decline in value. Currency exchange
rates may fluctuate significantly over short periods of time. These risks
may be more pronounced in connection with an Underlying Fund’s
investments in securities of issuers located in, or otherwise
economically tied to, emerging markets.
Interest Rate Risk. When interest rates increase, fixed income securities
or instruments held by an Underlying Fund will generally decline in
value. Long-term fixed income securities or instruments will normally
have more price volatility because of this risk than short-term fixed
income securities or instruments. Changing interest rates may have
unpredictable effects on the markets, may result in heightened market
volatility and may detract from an Underlying Fund’s performance. In
addition, changes in monetary policy may exacerbate the risks
associated with changing interest rates. Fluctuations in interest rates
may also affect the liquidity of fixed income securities and instruments
held by an Underlying Fund.
Investment Style Risk. Different investment styles (e.g., “growth”,
“value” or “quantitative”) tend to shift in and out of favor depending
upon market and economic conditions and investor sentiment. An
Underlying Fund may outperform or underperform other funds that
invest in similar asset classes but employ different investment styles.
Large Shareholder Transactions Risk. An Underlying Fund may
experience adverse effects when certain large shareholders purchase or
redeem large amounts of shares of the Underlying Fund. Such large
shareholder redemptions, which may occur rapidly or unexpectedly, may
cause an Underlying Fund to sell portfolio securities at times when it
would not otherwise do so, which may negatively impact the Underlying
Fund’s NAV and liquidity. Similarly, large purchases of Underlying
Fund shares may adversely affect the Underlying Fund’s performance to
the extent that the Underlying Fund is delayed in investing new cash or
otherwise maintains a larger cash position than it ordinarily would.
These transactions may also accelerate the realization of taxable income
to shareholders if such sales of investments resulted in gains, and may
also increase transaction costs. In addition, a large redemption could
result in an Underlying Fund’s current expenses being allocated over a
smaller asset base, leading to an increase in the Underlying Fund’s
expense ratio.
Leverage Risk. Borrowing and the use of derivatives may result in
leverage and may make an Underlying Fund more volatile. The use of
leverage may cause an Underlying Fund to liquidate portfolio positions
to satisfy its obligations or to meet asset segregation requirements when
it may not be advantageous to do so. The use of leverage by an
Underlying Fund can substantially increase the adverse impact to which
the Underlying Fund may be subject.
Liquidity Risk. An Underlying Fund may make investments that are
illiquid or that may become less liquid in response to market
developments or adverse investor perceptions. Illiquid investments may
be more difficult to value. Liquidity risk may also refer to the risk that
an Underlying Fund will not be able to pay redemption proceeds within
the allowable time period because of unusual market conditions,
declining prices of the securities sold, an unusually high volume of
redemption requests, or other reasons. To meet redemption requests, an
Underlying Fund may be forced to sell securities at an unfavorable time
and/or under unfavorable conditions. Liquidity risk may be the result of,
among other things, the reduced number and capacity of traditional
market participants to make a market in fixed income securities or the
lack of an active market. The potential for liquidity risk may be
magnified by a rising interest rate environment or other circumstances
where investor redemptions from fixed income funds may be higher
than normal, potentially causing increased supply in the market due to
selling activity. These risks may be more pronounced in connection with
an Underlying Fund’s investments in securities of issuers located in
emerging market countries. Redemptions by large shareholders may
have a negative impact on an Underlying Fund’s liquidity.
Loan-Related Investments Risk. In addition to risks generally
associated with debt investments (e.g., interest rate risk and default
risk), loan-related investments such as loan participations and
assignments are subject to other risks. Although a loan obligation may
be fully collateralized at the time of acquisition, the collateral may
decline in value, be or become illiquid or less liquid, or lose all or
substantially all of its value subsequent to investment. Many loan
investments are subject to legal or contractual restrictions on resale and
certain loan investments may be or become illiquid or less liquid and
more difficult to value, particularly in the event of a downgrade of the
loan or the borrower. There is less readily available, reliable information
about most loan investments than is the case for many other types of
securities. Substantial increases in interest rates may cause an increase
in loan obligation defaults. With respect to loan participations, an
Underlying Fund may not always have direct recourse against a
borrower if the borrower fails to pay scheduled principal and/or interest;
may be subject to greater delays, expenses and risks than if the
Underlying Fund had purchased a direct obligation of the borrower; and
may be regarded as the creditor of the agent lender (rather than the
borrower), subjecting the Underlying Fund to the creditworthiness of
that lender as well. Investors in loans, such as an Underlying Fund, may
not be entitled to rely on the anti-fraud protections of the federal
securities laws, although they may be entitled to certain contractual
remedies. The market for loan obligations may be subject to irregular
trading activity, wide bid/ask spreads and extended trade settlement
periods. Because transactions in many loans are subject to extended
trade settlement periods, an Underlying Fund may not receive the
proceeds from the sale of a loan for a period after the sale. As a result,
sale proceeds related to the sale of loans may not be available to make
additional investments or to meet an Underlying Fund’s redemption
obligations for a period after the sale of the loans, and, as a result, the
Underlying Fund may have to sell other investments or engage in
borrowing transactions, such as borrowing from its credit facility, if
necessary to raise cash to meet its obligations. During periods of
heightened redemption activity or distressed market conditions, the
Underlying Fund may seek to obtain expedited trade settlement, which
will generally incur additional costs (although expedited trade
settlement will not always be available).
Senior loans hold the most senior position in the capital structure of a
business entity, and are typically secured with specific collateral, but are
nevertheless usually rated below investment grade. Because second lien
loans are subordinated or unsecured and thus lower in priority of
payment to senior loans, they are subject to the additional risk that the
cash flow of the borrower and property securing the loan or debt, if any,
may be insufficient to meet scheduled payments after giving effect to
the senior secured obligations of the borrower. Second lien loans
generally have greater price volatility than senior loans and may be less
liquid. Generally, loans have the benefit of restrictive covenants that
limit the ability of the borrower to further encumber its assets or impose
other obligations. To the extent a loan does not have certain covenants
(or has less restrictive covenants), an investment in the loan will be
particularly sensitive to the risks associated with loan investments.
Management Risk. A strategy used by an Underlying Fund’s investment
adviser may fail to produce the intended results. The Underlying Fund’s
investment adviser attempts to execute a complex strategy for certain of
the Underlying Funds using proprietary quantitative models.
Investments selected using these models may perform differently than

expected as a result of the factors used in the models, the weight placed
on each factor, changes from the factors’ historical trends, and technical
issues in the construction and implementation of the models (including,
for example, data problems and/or software issues). There is no
guarantee that the Underlying Fund’s investment adviser’s use of these
quantitative models will result in effective investment decisions for an
Underlying Fund. Additionally, commonality of holdings across
quantitative money managers may amplify losses.
Market Risk. The market value of the securities in which an Underlying
Fund invests may go up or down in response to the prospects of
individual companies, particular sectors or governments and/or general
economic conditions throughout the world due to increasingly
interconnected global economies and financial markets. Events such as
war, military conflict, acts of terrorism, social unrest, natural disasters,
recessions, inflation, rapid interest rate changes, supply chain
disruptions, sanctions, the spread of infectious illness or other public
health threats could also significantly impact an Underlying Fund and
its investments.
Mid-Cap and Small-Cap Risk. Investments in mid-capitalization and
small-capitalization companies involve greater risks than those
associated with larger, more established companies. These securities
may be subject to more abrupt or erratic price movements and may lack
sufficient market liquidity, and these issuers often face greater
business risks.
Mortgage-Backed and Other Asset-Backed Securities Risk.
Mortgage-related and other asset-backed securities are subject to credit/
default, interest rate and certain additional risks, including “extension
risk” (i.e., in periods of rising interest rates, issuers may pay principal
later than expected) and “prepayment risk” (i.e., in periods of declining
interest rates, issuers may pay principal more quickly than expected,
causing an Underlying Fund to reinvest proceeds at lower prevailing
interest rates). Due to these risks, asset-backed securities may become
more volatile in certain interest rate environments. Mortgage-backed
securities offered by non-governmental issuers are subject to other risks
as well, including failures of private insurers to meet their obligations
and unexpectedly high rates of default on the mortgages backing the
securities, particularly during periods of rising interest rates. Other
asset-backed securities are subject to risks similar to those associated
with mortgage-backed securities, as well as risks associated with the
nature and servicing of the assets backing the securities. Asset-backed
securities may not have the benefit of a security interest in collateral
comparable to that of mortgage assets, resulting in additional credit risk.
Municipal Securities Risk. Municipal securities are subject to call/
prepayment risk, credit/default risk,extension risk, interest rate risk and
certain additional risks. An Underlying Fund may be more sensitive to
adverse economic, business or political developments if it invests a
substantial portion of its assets in the bonds of similar projects (such as
those relating to education, health care, housing, transportation, and
utilities), industrial development bonds, or in particular types of
municipal securities (such as general obligation bonds, private activity
bonds and moral obligation bonds). While interest earned on municipal
securities is generally not subject to federal tax, any interest earned on
taxable municipal securities is fully taxable at the federal level and may
be subject to tax at the state level.
Non-Diversification Risk. Certain Underlying Funds are
“non-diversified,” meaning that they are permitted to invest a larger
percentage of their assets in one or more issuers or in fewer issuers than
“diversified” funds. Thus, such an Underlying Fund may be more
susceptible to adverse developments affecting any single issuer held in
its portfolio, and may be more susceptible to greater losses because of
these developments.
Non-Hedging Foreign Currency Trading Risk. Certain Underlying
Funds may engage in forward foreign currency transactions for both
hedging and non-hedging purposes. An Underlying Fund’s investment
adviser may purchase or sell foreign currencies through the use of
forward contracts based on the investment adviser’s judgment regarding
the direction of the market for a particular foreign currency or
currencies. In pursuing this strategy, the Underlying Fund’s investment
adviser seeks to profit from anticipated movements in currency rates by
establishing “long” and/or “short” positions in forward contracts on
various foreign currencies. Foreign exchange rates can be extremely
volatile and a variance in the degree of volatility of the market or in the
direction of the market from the investment adviser’s expectations may
produce significant losses to an Underlying Fund. Some of these
transactions may also be subject to interest rate risk.
Non-Investment Grade Fixed Income Securities Risk. Non-investment
grade fixed income securities and unrated securities of comparable
credit quality (commonly known as “junk bonds”) are considered
speculative and are subject to the increased risk of an issuer’s inability
to meet principal and interest payment obligations. These securities may
be subject to greater price volatility due to such factors as specific
issuer developments, interest rate sensitivity, negative perceptions of the
junk bond markets generally and less liquidity.
Portfolio Turnover Rate Risk. A high rate of portfolio turnover
involves correspondingly greater expenses which must be borne by an
Underlying Fund and its shareholders (including the Fund), and is also
likely to result in short-term capital gains taxable to shareholders of the
Underlying Fund.
Real Estate Industry Risk. Certain Underlying Funds are subject to
certain risks associated with real estate, including, among others:
possible declines in the value of real estate; risks related to general and
local economic conditions; possible lack of availability of mortgage
financing, variations in rental income, neighborhood values or the
appeal of property to tenants; interest rates; overbuilding; extended
vacancies of properties; increases in competition, property taxes and
operating expenses; and changes in zoning laws. The real estate industry
is particularly sensitive to economic downturns. The values of securities
of companies in the real estate industry may go through cycles of
relative under-performance and out-performance in comparison to
equity securities markets in general.
REIT Risk. REITs whose underlying properties are concentrated in a
particular industry or geographic region are subject to risks affecting
such industries and regions. The securities of REITs involve greater
risks than those associated with larger, more established companies and
may be subject to more abrupt or erratic price movements because of
interest rate changes, economic conditions and other factors. Securities
of such issuers may lack sufficient market liquidity to enable an
Underlying Fund to effect sales at an advantageous time or without a
substantial drop in price.
Short Position Risk. An Underlying Fund may enter into a short
position through a futures contract, an option or swap agreement or
through short sales of any instrument that the Underlying Fund may
purchase for investment. Taking short positions involves leverage of an
Underlying Fund’s assets and presents various risks. If the value of the
underlying instrument or market in which an Underlying Fund has taken
a short position increases, then the Underlying Fund will incur a loss
equal to the increase in value from the time that the short position was
entered into plus any related interest payments or other fees. Taking
short positions involves the risk that losses may be disproportionate,
may exceed the amount invested and may be unlimited.

Small-Cap Risk. Investments in small-capitalization companies involve
greater risks than those associated with larger, more established
companies. These securities may be subject to more abrupt or erratic
price movements and may lack sufficient market liquidity, and these
issuers often face greater business risks.
Sovereign Default Risk. An issuer of non-U.S. sovereign debt, or the
governmental authorities that control the repayment of the debt, may be
unable or unwilling to repay the principal or interest when due. This
may result from political or social factors, the general economic
environment of a country, levels of borrowing rates, foreign debt, or
foreign currency exchange rates.
Stock Risk. Stock prices have historically risen and fallen in periodic
cycles. U.S. and foreign stock markets have experienced periods of
substantial price volatility in the past and may do so again in the future.
Subsidiary Risk. By investing in a wholly-owned subsidiary organized
as a company under the laws of the Cayman Islands (a “Subsidiary” or
the “Subsidiaries”), certain Underlying Funds will be indirectly exposed
to the risks associated with the Subsidiaries’ investments, which are
similar to those that are permitted to be held by the Underlying Funds.
An Underlying Fund is limited in the extent to which it may invest
directly in commodity-linked swaps or certain other commodity-linked
derivatives. The Subsidiaries primarily obtain their commodity exposure
by investing in commodity-linked derivative instruments, which may
include but are not limited to total return swaps, commodity (U.S. or
foreign) futures and commodity-linked notes. There can be no assurance
that the investment objective of the Subsidiaries will be achieved.
Because the Subsidiaries are not registered under the Investment
Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”),
they are not subject to all the investor protections thereof. Changes in
the laws of the United States and/or the Cayman Islands could result in
the inability of an Underlying Fund and/or its Subsidiary to operate as
described in its prospectus and could adversely affect the
Underlying Fund.
Swaps Risk. In a standard “swap” transaction, two parties agree to
exchange the returns, differentials in rates of return or some other
amount earned or realized on the “notional amount” of predetermined
investments or instruments, which may be adjusted for an interest factor.
Swaps can involve greater risks than direct investment in securities,
because swaps may be leveraged and subject to counterparty risk (e.g.,
the risk of a counterparty’s defaulting on the obligation or bankruptcy),
credit risk and pricing risk (i.e., swaps may be difficult to value). Swaps
may also be considered illiquid. It may not be possible for an
Underlying Fund to liquidate a swap position at an advantageous time or
price, which may result in significant losses.
Treasury Inflation Protected Securities Risk. The value of TIPS
generally fluctuates in response to inflationary concerns. As inflationary
expectations increase, TIPS will become more attractive, because they
protect future interest payments against inflation. Conversely, as
inflationary concerns decrease, TIPS will become less attractive and
less valuable.
U.S. Government Securities Risk. The U.S. government may not
provide financial support to U.S. government agencies, instrumentalities
or sponsored enterprises if it is not obligated to do so by law. U.S.
government securities issued by those agencies, instrumentalities and
sponsored enterprises, including those issued by the Federal National
Mortgage Association (“Fannie Mae”), Federal Home Loan Mortgage
Corporation (“Freddie Mac”) and the Federal Home Loan Banks, are
neither issued nor guaranteed by the U.S. Treasury and, therefore, are
not backed by the full faith and credit of the United States. The
maximum potential liability of the issuers of some U.S. government
securities held by an Underlying Fund may greatly exceed their current

AVERAGE ANNUAL TOTAL RETURN
For the period ended December 31, 2023 1 Year 5 Years 10 Years
Inception
Date
Class A Shares 1/2/1998
Returns Before Taxes 10.87% 8.33% 5.75%
Returns After Taxes on Distributions 10.47% 7.21% 4.92%
Returns After Taxes on Distributions and Sale of Fund Shares 6.65% 6.36% 4.39%
Class C Shares 1/2/1998
Returns Before Taxes 15.47% 8.74% 5.56%*
Institutional Shares 1/2/1998
Returns Before Taxes 17.83% 9.98% 6.76%
Service Shares 1/2/1998
Returns Before Taxes 17.23% 9.43% 6.24%
Investor Shares 11/30/2007
Returns Before Taxes 17.67% 9.84% 6.62%
Class R Shares 11/30/2007
Returns 17.07% 9.29% 6.08%
Class R6 Shares 7/31/2015
Returns Before Taxes 17.76% 9.97% 6.77%**
Growth Strategy Composite Index 19.10% 9.87% 6.99%
MSCI® ACWI Index (Net, USD, Unhedged; reflects no deduction for fees or expenses) 22.20% 11.71% 7.92%
Bloomberg Global Aggregate Bond Index (Gross, USD, Hedged; reflects no deduction for fees, expenses or taxes) 7.15% 1.39% 2.41%
* Class C Shares automatically convert into Class A Shares eight years after the purchase date. The 10-Year performance for Class C Shares does not reflect the conversion t



FEES AND EXPENSES OF THE FUND
This table describes the fees and expenses that you may pay if you buy, hold and sell shares of the Fund. You may pay other fees, such as brokerage
commissions and other fees to financial intermediaries, which are not reflected in the table and Example below. You may qualify for sales
charge discounts on purchases of Class A Shares if you invest at least $50,000 in Goldman Sachs Funds. More information about these and other
discounts is available from your financial professional and in “Shareholder Guide—Common Questions Applicable to the Purchase of Class A
Shares” beginning on page 71 and in Appendix C—Additional Information About Sales Charge Variations, Waivers and Discounts beginning on page
129 of the Prospectus and “Other Information Regarding Maximum Sales Charge, Purchases, Redemptions, Exchanges and Dividends” beginning on
page B-175 of the Fund’s Statement of Additional Information (“SAI”).
Shareholder Fees
(fees paid directly from your investment)
Class A Class C Institutional Service Investor Class R Class R6
Maximum Sales Charge (Load) Imposed on Purchases (as a
percentage of offering price) 5.50% None None None None None None
Maximum Deferred Sales Charge (Load) (as a percentage of the lower
of original purchase price or sale proceeds)1 None 1.00% None None None None None
Annual Fund Operating Expenses
(expenses that you pay each year as a percentage of the value of your investment)
Class A Class C Institutional Service Investor Class R Class R6
Management Fees 0.15% 0.15% 0.15% 0.15% 0.15% 0.15% 0.15%
Distribution and/or Service (12b-1) Fees 0.25% 0.75% 0.00% 0.25% 0.00% 0.50% 0.00%
Other Expenses 0.20% 0.45% 0.09% 0.34% 0.20% 0.20% 0.08%
Service Fees 0.00% 0.25% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00%
Shareholder Administration Fees 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.25% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00%
All Other Expenses 0.20% 0.20% 0.09% 0.09% 0.20% 0.20% 0.08%
Acquired (Underlying) Fund Fees and Expenses 0.41% 0.41% 0.41% 0.41% 0.41% 0.41% 0.41%
Total Annual Fund Operating Expenses2 1.01% 1.76% 0.65% 1.15% 0.76% 1.26% 0.64%
Expense Limitation3 (0.05%) (0.05%) (0.05%) (0.05%) (0.05%) (0.05%) (0.05%)
Total Annual Fund Operating Expenses After Expense
Limitation3 0.96% 1.71% 0.60% 1.10% 0.71% 1.21% 0.59%