Procurement and Distribution of Essential Medicines in Punjab.
Abstract:
Primary and Secondary Healthcare Department (P&SHD), Government of Punjab, is responsible for providing free of cost public healthcare services within the Punjab province. P&SHD manages a hierarchically organised network of almost three thousand primary and secondary healthcare facilities throughout Punjab. This case highlights the issue of medicine availability in the Punjab healthcare network. The medicine inventories at these facilities are maintained as per the National Essential Drugs List. These medicines are centrally procured in accordance with the applicable procurement and financial regulations. Suppliers deliver medicines to the designated facilities according at the delivery terms agreed upon in the procurement contract. The purpose of this case is to observe how such a complex inventory system is organised within a public-sector entity which operates under strict procurement and financial regulations. The case also aims to highlight the importance of the systematic alignment of demand forecasting, procurement and distribution functions for efficient functioning of the medicine inventory system.

The overcast on December 10th, 2017 strangely mirrored the ominous atmosphere in the meeting room. Several operational changes had been introduced to the medicine procurement and distribution process during the previous year. Today, the meeting’s agenda was to review the overall impact of these changes on medicine inventory volumes and medicine availability measures.  The participants, Ali Jan Khan — Secretary of Primary and Secondary Healthcare Department (P&SHD) — and Areeb Javaid — a consultant at Special Monitoring Unit (SMU) — hoped to discern improvements and identify problem areas for further interventions.
 P&SHD had undertaken drastic measures in various functional areas of medicine procurement and delivery cycle. For the year 2017-18, the entire procurement (bid selection and purchase order generation) and distribution process had been centralised. This reaped a saving of PKR 1.1 billion in price negotiations from the previous year (total medicine cost was PKR 8 billion in the 2016-17). The department was also hopeful that the setting up of a central warehousing facility called medical stock depot (MSD) would generate additional savings in both transportation and drug testing costs.
While Ali Jan was generally content with the department’s efforts in realising such improvements, he still felt that further changes were required. He was particularly troubled by reports indicating rising medicine inventory levels at different hospital facilities across Punjab. These reports on medicine stocks at various healthcare facilities, presented by Areeb, were not very promising. 
The stock levels significantly exceeded the consumption levels for the majority of the medicines analysed as shown in Figure 1 .  An overstocking situation of such an extent was troublesome. It meant that millions of rupees were tied up in inventory, ultimately driving up expiration concerns. The issue hence warranted immediate attention from P&SHD. Ali Jan quickly understood the gravity of the matter and accordingly asked Areeb to set up a team to evaluate the situation at hand, and arrive at possible solutions for the identified problems.

Figure 1: Total Consumption and Stock Levels of Selected Medicines at the Tehsil Headquarter Facilities from June 2016 to June 2017
Healthcare in Pakistan
Bordered by Afghanistan, Iran, China and India, Pakistan was at the heart of South Asia. Punjab, located in the country’s northeast, constituted Pakistan’s most populated region (Figure 2). Healthcare services in Pakistan were provided by both public and private sector entities. The private healthcare sector comprised roughly 80% of all outpatient visits whereas 20% of the outpatient population was served by the public sector. The federal legislature passed the 18th Amendment in July 2010, which stipulated provincial autonomy and devolution of legislative and executive authority for public healthcare services .  
Figure 2: The Locations of Pakistan and Punjab on the World Map
Primary and Secondary Healthcare Department (P&SHD) 
Primary and Secondary Healthcare Department (P&SHD) was the main department assigned with the fundamental responsibility of health development within Punjab. P&SHD delivered on several fronts, i.e., promotive, preventive, and curative healthcare services at primary as well as secondary healthcare levels .
The organisational structure of the P&SHD shown in Exhibit 1 depicts the chain of command at both provincial and district levels. The P&SHD was led by Secretary Ali Jan Khan. He was responsible to the Minister PS&HD and via him, to the Chief Minister and the provincial legislature. The Secretary was assisted by a team comprising members who were senior civil servants and public health specialists. The team included Special Secretary P&SHD, Director General Health Services (DGHS), and five Additional Secretaries (AS) — one each for administration, drug control, vertical programmes, development & finance, and technical wings. 
The P&SHD’s primary and secondary healthcare facilities, i.e., the first two tiers of service delivery, were under the supervision and control of district governments . The Chief Executive Officer (CEO) at the District Health Authority (DHA) was assisted by the District Health Official (DHO), Additional District Health Official (ADHO), and Medical Superintendents (MSs) of various Tehsil and District Headquarter hospitals (see Exhibit 1).
Primary (BHU, RHC and MHU) and secondary healthcare (THQ and DHQ) facilities and their catchment populations are shown in Exhibit 2. We look at primary and secondary healthcare in more detail in the subsequent sections.
Primary Healthcare
Primary healthcare facilities comprised Basic Health Units (BHUs), Rural Health Centres (RHCs), and Mobile Health Units (MHUs). They offered preventive, outpatient, and basic inpatient healthcare service . They provided eighteen essential medicines at each of the three units by maintaining the requisite inventories. 
Located at the union council level, a BHU had 2-6 inpatient beds and served a catchment population of up to 25,000 people . Services at BHU were promotive (preventive and curative), and are shown in Exhibit 3. RHCs had a 10-20 inpatient bed capacity and served a catchment population of up to 100,000 people . The services provided at the RHC level were similar to those provided at the BHU level, and are detailed in Exhibit 3. MHUs were introduced in 2010 at tehsil level to provide basic health services to the people of Punjab living in remote rural areas  (see Exhibit 3). There are a total of fifty-four MHUs currently operational in six districts, namely Muzaffargarh, Rajanpur, Mianwali, Dera Gazi Khan, Bahawalpur and Bahawalnagar.

